Glutathione S-transferases (GSTs) are versatile enzymes, act as primary intracellular detoxifiers and contribute to a broad range of physiological processes including cellular defense. In this study, a full-length cDNA representing a novel sigma-like GST was identified from Manila clam, Ruditapes philippinarum (RpGST_). RpGST_ (884bp) was found to possess an open reading frame of 609bp. The encoded polypeptide (203 amino acids) had a predicted molecular mass of 23.21kDa and an isoelectric point of 7.64. Sequence analysis revealed two conserved GST domain profiles in N- and C-termini. Alignment studies revealed that the identity between deduced peptides of RpGST_ and known GST_ members was relatively low (<35%), except a previously identified Manila clam GST_ isoform (87.2%). Phylogenetic analysis indicated that RpGST_ clustered together with molluscan GST_ homologs, which were closely related to insect GST_s. The RpGST_ was subsequently cloned and expressed as recombinant protein, in order to characterize its biological activity. The recombinant RpGST_ exhibited characteristic glutathione conjugating catalytic activity toward 1-chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene, 3,4-dichloronitrobenzene and ethacrynic acid. It had an optimal pH and temperature of 8.0 and 35'C, respectively. Expression profiles under normal conditions and in response to lipopolysaccharide-, poly I:C- and Vibrio tapetis-challenges were also investigated. RpGST_ demonstrated a differential tissue distribution with robust transcription in gills of normal animals. We explored potential association of GST_ in cellular defense during bacterial infection and found that in challenged clams, RpGST_ gene was significantly induced in internal and external tissues, in conjunction with manganese- as well as copper-zinc superoxide dismutase (MnSOD and CuZnSOD) genes. Moreover, the induction was remarkably higher in hemocytes than in gill. Collectively, our findings suggested that RpGST_ could play a significant role in cellular defense against oxidative stress caused by bacteria, in conjunction with other antioxidant enzymes, such as SODs.
