Genetic changes in regulatory elements are likely to result in phenotypic effects that might explain population-specific as well as species-specific traits. MicroRNAs are post-transcriptional repressors involved in the control of almost every biological process. These small non-coding RNAs are present in various phylogenetic groups and a large number of them remain highly conserved at the sequence level. MicroRNA-mediated regulation depends on perfect matching between the 7 nucleotides of its seed region and the target sequence usually located at the 3'UTR of the regulated gene. Hence, even single changes in seed regions are predicted to be deleterious as they may affect microRNA target specificity. In accordance to this, purifying selection has strongly acted on these regions. Comparison between the genomes of present-day humans from various populations, Neanderthal and other non-human primates showed a microRNA, miR-1304, that carries a polymorphism on its seed region. The ancestral allele is found in Neanderthal, non-human primates, at low frequency (_5%) in modern Asian populations and rarely in Africans. Using microRNA target site prediction algorithms we found that the derived allele increases the number of putative target genes for the derived microRNA more than tenfold, indicating an important functional evolution for miR-1304. Analysis of the predicted targets for derived miR-1304 indicates an association with behavior and nervous system development and function. Two of the predicted target genes for the ancestral miR-1304 allele are important genes for teeth formation, enamelin and amelotin. MicroRNA over-expression experiments using a luciferase-based assay showed that the ancestral version of miR-1304 reduces the enamelin and amelotin associated reporter gene expression by 50%, whereas the derived miR-1304 does not have any effect. Deletion of the corresponding target sites for miR-1304 in these dental genes avoided their repression, which further supports their regulation by the ancestral miR-1304. Morphological studies described several differences in the dentition of Neanderthals and present-day humans like slower dentition timing and thicker enamel for present-day humans. The observed miR-1304 mediated-regulation of enamelin and amelotin could at least partially underlie these differences between the two Homo species as well as other still-unraveled phenotypic differences among modern human populations.
