Architecture and construction are highly interdisciplinary fields, integrating many professions and many disciplines on different levels of scale and complexity. Studies of natural systems have at all times been inspirational for design. Investigating the overlaps between biology and architecture we find that a biological paradigm inspires the current frontier of research and innovation in many sectors. Using biology's categories to analyse the field we discover many 'signs of life' in architecture projects, and many researchers are actively involved with ways to implement more and more aspects of life into buildings without calling themselves biomimeticists. Meanwhile the architectural landscape has adopted biomimetics, bionics, biologically inspired design or biomimicry as valid strategies. However, it still lacks a showcase of innovative products or real breakthrough in the form of a 'really biomimetic building'. This implies the interpretation of biomimetics as an architectural style, defining the entirety of a building, best reflected in the overall form. Architecture is developed in different layers and has to meet often contradictory requirements that make information transfer difficult. Too many possibilities and levels of information are interconnected to identify simple straightforward questions and answers. In addition, other challenges have to be met for the adoption of principles from biology in architecture and there is still a difficulty in the gathering of information. Finding phenomena that lend themselves as role models is a challenge for architects and designers in spite of various attempts at generating databases and knowledge transfer systems. Whenever designers stumble across an interesting phenomenon, the relevant information is often available only in a generic manner or, even worse, limited to a narrow view angle related to a specific interest. In order to get hold of transferable information, research from another perspective in life sciences is needed, so that interdisciplinary collaboration can provide the platform essential for successful developments, as illustrated in the present collection of papers. In spite of all of the participating research groups working with a biomimetic focus, the translations and inspirations discussed in the papers are located mostly on the level of generic abstract principles, sometimes also referred to as 'deep principles'. Examples include composite materials aspects, anisotropy and heterogeneity, when we talk about materials and systems, and morphological differentiation and adaptation when we consider form generation processes. Tom Wiscombe designs visionary buildings that explore the potentials of architectural surfaces to be shifted from two-dimensionality to one or three dimensionality by introducing de-lamination, winding, fusing, blending and embedding of building systems. The use of non-mineral materials and suggestion of the logic of healing and weaving are directly taken from biological material processing. Functionally graded materials and the introduction of microparticles and biochemical systems shall further extend the possibilities to create future environments. Jan Knippers, Thomas Speck and Achim Menges have initiated a successful interdisciplinary collaboration between architecture, computational design, engineering and biology. They interpret architecture and biological evolution as nondeterministic processes, sharing parallels but fundamental differences at the same time. Those differences are the basis for the investigation of new technologies. The ICD/ITKE Research Pavillion 2010 stands as an example for a homogenous construction using a single textured material, parametric differentiation and shaping of large elastic deformations, using digital simulation, planning and production processes. The development of the so-called Flectofin((c)) lamellas for shading of facades is based on the kinematics of the Strelitzia reginae flower, and again exploits an effect usually unwelcomed in engineering-torsional buckling-together with the use of fibre reinforced material. The introduction of such a system into a large scale building facade is presented with the thematic pavilion at EXPO 2012 in Korea, designed and engineered by SOMA Architects, Vienna and Knippers Helbig Advanced Engineering, Stuttgart, New York. These large scale implementations of principles derived from nature show the potential for the application of biomimetics in architectural design. Achim Menges' paper is a concise discussion of morphogenetic computational design, presenting form generation in contrast to the traditional form definition and form finding strategies in architectural design. Computational design allows for radically new approaches in the use, processing and generation of information that is translated into architectural form via new technologies. The generative design process is limited by phylogenetic and physical constraints. According to Menges, the challenge of this approach lies in resolving the complexity arising from the interrelation and reciprocal effects of material systems and dynamic environments. Evolutionary design exploration is introduced as a method together with a detailed description of case studies exploring the design of form-performance relations of overall building morphologies and urban block morphologies. Taken together, the presented papers show a promising development towards the implementation of biomimetics in the design of future built environments. References Wiscombe T 2012 Beyond assemblies: systems convergence and multi-materiality Bioinspir. Biomim. 7 015001 Knippers J and Speck T 2012 Design and construction principles in nature and architecture Bioinspir. Biomim. 7 015002 Menges A 2012 Biomimetic design processes in architecture: morphogenetic and evolutionary computational design Bioinspir. Biomim. 7 015003.
